Blog.md, before:

---
Title: Interactive Analysis with Shiny R
Author: Jason (Jiayi) Liu
Date: Feb 8, 2015
---

# Background

Safty is my first concern when I search for a new place to live.  However it is a hard question when I move to a new city.  Suggestions from friends are useful but may be biased by their own experience.

Thanks to the NYC open data, now I can check the crime record interactive.  But it is hard to find the find the trend easily.  Here is the official [NYC crime map](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/), and here is another [visualization](http://www.city-data.com/crime/crime-New-York-New-York.html).  So I decided to build my own visualization.

# Data Mining

After scrutinizing the javascript of the NYC crime map, I found that the basic information for precincts are stored in `crime/js/data.js` and the crime records for each precinct are retrieved by a google API request.  The easiest way to discover that request is by monitoring the network traffic, for example, using the network monitor in the [Chrome developer tools](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools#improving-network-performance).

The data mining are splitted into two steps.  In the following, I will explain these two steps in details.  In addition, the source code is avaialbe on [github](https://github.com/jiayiliu/NYC-Crime-Analysis).

## Extract basic precinct information
We need three basic information for each precinct: `ID`, `population`, and `area`.  This information is stored in [data.js](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/js/data.js).  Because it is in javascript format, we need a little manual tweak here to convert it into [JSON](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools#improving-network-performance) file.  From line 288 we copy the text after `pct:{`.  Notice keep the bracktes in pairs.  And save the text into a `precinct.json` file for the next step.  This text is now a JSON array with the ID as the key for each entry and in the entry, "g" for the area geometry and "p" for the population.

In `R`, the `jsonlite` package provides a convinient interface to read JSON data into a list.
`fromJSON("precinct.json")` will load the file into a list with precinct IDs for names, and contains two lists inside: `g` and `p`.

Now the data is almost ready to use.  However there is a potential problem.  Take a look of the precinct data, you will find the area of precinct 1 is not one continuious shape, so under the list element `g`, it contains several lists, each one is a 2-D list of the coordinates of the nodes for a polygon shape.

## Retrieve crime records

The official [NYC crime map](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/) uses google APIs to provide unique data access points.  The detail crime record is retrieved by [AJAX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ajax_%28programming%29) request in [ui.js](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/js/ui.js).  The following code provide a web crawler to download one crime entry by given the precinct ID, year, and month.

```
#' Get crime record from \url{http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/} API
#' @param year Choose from 2013 to 2014 calander year
#' @param month Choose from 1 to 12 for month
#' @param precinct Choose from \code pid to get corresponding precinct
#' @return data frame with one row of crime record
get_crime_data <- function(year, month, precinct){
    # given year, month and precinct and return crime records
    if (year < 2013 | year > 2014){
        warning("For 2013-2014 only")
    }    
    referer <- "http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/"
    url_base <- "https://www.googleapis.com/"
    path <- paste0("mapsengine/v1/tables/",
                   "02378420399528461352-02912990955588156238/features/",
                   "?key=AIzaSyDW3Wvk6xWLlLI6Bfu29DuDaseX-g18_mo&",
                   "version=published&maxResults=1000&select=CR,TOT&")
    query <- 
        sprintf("where=MO%%3D%d%%20AND%%20YR%%3D%d%%20AND%%20PCT%%3D%%27%d%%27", 
                month, year, precinct)
    html <- GET(url_base, path=paste0(path,query), add_headers(referer=referer))
    j <- fromJSON(rawToChar(html$content))
    j <- j$features$properties
    if (is.null(j)) warning(paste("No data retrieved",year, month, precinct))
    s <- list()
    s$year <- year
    s$month <- month
    s$precinct <- precinct
    for (crime in c("RAPE","ROBBERY","BURGLARY","MURDER","FELONY ASSAULT",
                    "GRAND LARCENY","GRAND LARCENY OF MOTOR VEHICLE")){
        # fill in 0 if no data.
        s[[crime]] <- ifelse(crime %in% j$CR, j$TOT[crime==j$CR], 0)
    }
    data.frame(s)       
}
```

The above function `get_crime_data` will fetch one month crime data for a specific precinct.  After saving all available precincts in `data.js` from 2013-2014, we finish the web scraping part.

# Analysis and Visualization

## Difficulties to overcome

+ First, the heterogeneous nature of the crimes creates the first challenge to understand the crime distribution in NYC.  The following code will create the pie chart for the composition of crimes: 

1) We load the processed data `load("data/record.RData")`.
2) We get one month data or monthly averaged data from `mdata <- get_monthly_data(data, -1, mean=TRUE)`.
3) We create a melted data with `value` (crime number) and `variable` (crime type): `vdata <- vdata <- melt(mdata[mdata$MONTH==1,],id="MONTH")`.
4) Now we are ready to plot the pie chart `plot_crime_pie(vdata)



```
plot_crime_pie <- function(data, weight=NULL){
    fig <- ggplot(data, aes(x="", y=value, fill=variable)) + 
        geom_bar(width=1,stat="identity") + 
        coord_polar(theta="y") +
        scale_fill_brewer(palette="Set1", name="Crime Type",
                          breaks=c(crime.type),
                          labels=labels[-1]) + 
        xlab("") + ylab("") + ggtitle("Crime Dist.")
    
    if (is.null(weight))
        return(fig)
    
    data$wvalue <- data$value*weight
    fig2 <- ggplot(data, aes(x="", y=wvalue, fill=variable)) + 
        geom_bar(width=1,stat="identity") + 
        coord_polar(theta="y") +
        scale_fill_brewer(palette="Set1", name="Crime Type",
                          breaks=c(crime.type),
                          labels=labels[-1]) + 
        xlab("") + ylab("") + ggtitle("Weighted Crime Dist.")
    
    return(multiplot(fig,fig2,cols=1))
}
```


# Shiny R app

Commit message:

Update css style to be consistent with new shinyR website

Blog.md, after:

---
Title: Crime Analysis with Shiny R
Author: Jason (Jiayi) Liu
Date: Feb 8, 2015
---

# Background

Safety is my first concern when I search for a new place to live. However it is a hard question when I move to a new city. Suggestions from friends are useful but may be biased by their own experience.

Thanks to the NYC open data, now I can check the crime record interactive.  But it is hard to find the find the trend easily.  Here is the official [NYC crime map](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/), and here is another [visualization](http://www.city-data.com/crime/crime-New-York-New-York.html).  So I decided to build my own visualization.

# Data Mining

The first step in data mining is clarify the scope of information target.  After checking the official website, I decided to extract the crime numbers and populations for each precinct and each month.  Those information are stored in pop-up windows and further links.  Notice that the website doesn’t change web address, so we cannot easily retrieve the information by using URLs.  In addition, I also need to find the boundaries of precincts for visualization purpose.

After scrutinizing the javascript of the NYC crime map, I found that the basic information for precincts are stored in [crime/js/data.js](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/js/data.js) and the crime records for each precinct are retrieved by a google API request, which is just a little hard for data mining.

Before moving to mining details, I would like to introduce a general way to find where the information is from.  The way is by monitoring the network traffic, for example, using the network monitor in the [Chrome developer tools](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools#improving-network-performance).  If no additional information is transferred via the Internet, then the information is probably stored in a static file, which has been downloaded by web browser already.  If there is additional information, you could find them under the Network traffic.  And using the developer tools, we could analyze the request details and extract information efficiently.

In the following, I will explain these two steps in details. In addition, the source code is available on [github](https://github.com/jiayiliu/NYC-Crime-Analysis).

## Extract basic precinct information
We need three basic information for each precinct: `ID`, `population`, and `area`.  This information is stored in [data.js](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/js/data.js).  Because it is in javascript format, we need a little manual tweak here to convert it into [JSON](https://developer.chrome.com/devtools#improving-network-performance) file.  From line 288 we copy the text after `pct:{`.  Notice keep the brackets in pairs.  And save the text into a `precinct.json` file for the next step.  This text is now a JSON array with the ID as the key for each entry and in the entry, "g" for the area geometry and "p" for the population.

In `R`, the `jsonlite` package provides a convenient interface to read JSON data into a list.
`fromJSON("precinct.json")` will load the file into a list with precinct IDs for names, and contains two lists inside: `g` and `p`.

Now the precinct data is almost ready to use.  Almost!  There is a potential problem. Even there is no warning, the data may not be ready to use without check systematically.   Take a look of the precinct data, you will find the area of precinct 1 is not one continuous shape, so under the list element `g`, it contains several lists, each one is a 2-D list of the coordinates of the nodes for a polygon shape.  This is a typical problem with those advanced scripting language, the variables can be allocated automatically.  So the created list may contains unexpected objects and causes the further result unreliable.

## Retrieve crime records

The official [NYC crime map](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/) uses Google APIs to provide unique data access points.  The detail crime record is retrieved by [AJAX](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ajax_%28programming%29) request in [ui.js](http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/js/ui.js).  The following code provide a web crawler to download one crime entry by given the precinct ID, year, and month.  Notice that we need to provide not only the resource address (*url_base*), but also the referrer (notice that in [Rcurl](http://www.omegahat.org/RCurl/), it is **referer**), keys and additional information.  Omitting those information will result the server denies our requests.  These information helps us to mimic the behavior of the official website.

```
#' Get crime record from \url{http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/} API
#' @param year Choose from 2013 to 2014 calendar year
#' @param month Choose from 1 to 12 for month
#' @param precinct Choose from \code pid to get corresponding precinct
#' @return data frame with one row of crime record
get_crime_data <- function(year, month, precinct){
    # given year, month and precinct and return crime records
    if (year < 2013 | year > 2014){
        warning("For 2013-2014 only")
    }    
    referer <- "http://maps.nyc.gov/crime/"
    url_base <- "https://www.googleapis.com/"
    path <- paste0("mapsengine/v1/tables/",
                   "02378420399528461352-02912990955588156238/features/",
                   "?key=AIzaSyDW3Wvk6xWLlLI6Bfu29DuDaseX-g18_mo&",
                   "version=published&maxResults=1000&select=CR,TOT&")
    query <- 
        sprintf("where=MO%%3D%d%%20AND%%20YR%%3D%d%%20AND%%20PCT%%3D%%27%d%%27", 
                month, year, precinct)
    html <- GET(url_base, path=paste0(path,query), add_headers(referer=referer))
    j <- fromJSON(rawToChar(html$content))
    j <- j$features$properties
    if (is.null(j)) warning(paste("No data retrieved",year, month, precinct))
    s <- list()
    s$year <- year
    s$month <- month
    s$precinct <- precinct
    for (crime in c("RAPE","ROBBERY","BURGLARY","MURDER","FELONY ASSAULT",
                    "GRAND LARCENY","GRAND LARCENY OF MOTOR VEHICLE")){
        # fill in 0 if no data.
        s[[crime]] <- ifelse(crime %in% j$CR, j$TOT[crime==j$CR], 0)
    }
    data.frame(s)       
}
```

The above function `get_crime_data` will fetch one month crime data for a specific precinct.  After saving all available precincts in `data.js` from 2013-2014, we finish the web scraping part.

# Analysis and Visualization

## Difficulties to overcome

+ First, the heterogeneous nature of the crimes creates the first challenge to understand the crime distribution in NYC.  The following code will create the pie chart for the composition of crimes: 

1) We load the processed data `load("data/record.RData")`.
2) We get one month data or monthly averaged data from `mdata <- get_monthly_data(data, -1, mean=TRUE)`.
3) We create a melted data with `value` (crime number) and `variable` (crime type): `vdata <- vdata <- melt(mdata[mdata$MONTH==1,],id="MONTH")`.
4) Now we are ready to plot the pie chart `plot_crime_pie(vdata)



```
plot_crime_pie <- function(data, weight=NULL){
    fig <- ggplot(data, aes(x="", y=value, fill=variable)) + 
        geom_bar(width=1,stat="identity") + 
        coord_polar(theta="y") +
        scale_fill_brewer(palette="Set1", name="Crime Type",
                          breaks=c(crime.type),
                          labels=labels[-1]) + 
        xlab("") + ylab("") + ggtitle("Crime Dist.")
    
    if (is.null(weight))
        return(fig)
    
    data$wvalue <- data$value*weight
    fig2 <- ggplot(data, aes(x="", y=wvalue, fill=variable)) + 
        geom_bar(width=1,stat="identity") + 
        coord_polar(theta="y") +
        scale_fill_brewer(palette="Set1", name="Crime Type",
                          breaks=c(crime.type),
                          labels=labels[-1]) + 
        xlab("") + ylab("") + ggtitle("Weighted Crime Dist.")
    
    return(multiplot(fig,fig2,cols=1))
}
```
